[BLANK_AUDIO]
In this lecture I'm just going to present
the short checklist
of things that I think you should think
about when doing
any sort of data analysis project or any
sort of investigation
involving a lot of data and, and kind of
processing and analysis.
This by no means a comprehensive checklist
and it doesn't come with necessarily any
guarantees that everything is going to go
well for you, if you follow the checklist.
But I think over the through my
experience, and through the
experience of you know people I worked
with a lot of
the items that I'm going to talk about in
this checklist I
think are important, and, and will at
least be a basis
for you to kind of do your analysis in a
reproducible manner.
All right, so, I'm just going to, just a
couple
of do's and don'ts that I'm going to go
through.
And then at the end I'll summarize, kind
of,
the basic questions that you want to ask
yourself.
Any time your doing any sort of data
analysis or project that's kind of beyond
a trivial
kind of analysis.
[BLANK_AUDIO]
So, the first thing you want to start with
is some good science.
So, and the idea here is you gotta be
working on something that's
interesting to you, that you think is to
come interesting to other people.
Because if you start with something that's
but,
that you don't like or you don't think
is good, then you're just going to end up
probably with something that's not good on
the out.
So, garbage in, garbage out is the, is
the, is the basic idea here.
So start with some good science.
And we're, and make sure you have a, a
question or
a goal that's relatively focused and
coherent.
it, that's not always possible, depending
on the
types of, of problems that you're working
on.
But in general, the more coherent and
focused question that you can,
fo, then you can work on the simpler that
your problem will be.
And because, because a narrower question
or a more focused type of question tends
to rule out a lot of possibilities that
you won't have to worry about.
But if you have a very broad and very
vague
type of question then you'll have lots of
things to deal with and
lots of things to think about and
generally increase the complexity of your
problem.
Of course you should always work with
people who
are good collaborators, people who you'd
like to work with.
People that, you think that have a good
kind of, working relationship with, with,
because we don't have good working
relationships,
then this can lead to other bad practices.
So good work collaborators generally
reinforce
good work practices.
And of course make sure that something
that is interesting to you.
Because if you are interested in the idea
then hopefully
that will motivate you to kind of have
some good habits.
So, in just, so the first thing you should
always deal with is, you know,
start with something that's good, start
with some
good science, start with some good
interesting topics.
I think if there's one rule, if I were to
boil everything down to
one rule when it comes to reproducibility,
it would be don't do things by hand.
Alright, so doing things by hand is
usually where most investigations get
tripped up.
and, and were things that were not
reproducible come into play.
And so I just give a couple of examples
here of things that are often done by
hand.
The first, the first one being, you know,
editing a spreadsheet.
So if you use something like Microsoft
Excel
or something, or a similar type of
program.
It's all, it's, it's tempting to kind of
load the data
in Excel, and then just clean up some of
the messy data.
Like you might have some outliers
that you just want to remove, or if your
doing some QA QC you know, on the
data and some values might be, you know,
out of the range or something like that.
So you just fix them right there.
You might validate certain types of
measurements like by using,
you know, a couple of experts or something
like that.
These kinds of things are very easy to do.
And it's particularly in spreadsheet
programs
and it's very tempting to do that.
But the problem with doing that kind of
kind of in
the spreadsheet analysis is that it's not
really reproducible at all.
Unless you write down exactly what you
did, and how you
did it, and what were the criteria for
doing certain things.
For example, if you're going to remove
outliers, what's the
criteria for determining what an outlier
is etc like that.
So unless you write down everything very
precisely like
that editing a spreadsheet by hand is
often not reproducible.
And so you should try to avoid it if you
can.
Editing things like tables and figures of,
this is maybe less of an issue.
But it still may be, leads us to something
that's not reproducible.
For example, we change if you change the
rounding in a table, or something like
that.
that can be, lead to, lead to something
that is not reproducible.
Something as innocuous is maybe
downloading data from
a website, which maybe you do you might
have to do a lot, if you're, you're
kind of assembling many different data
set, data
sets.
You might think that well, this is very
simple.
I'm just going to open my web browser,
click on a link, and download a data set.
But that's again, that's something that
you do by hand.
And if you were going to tell someone how,
how to, someone else
how to do it there would be a lengthy set
of instructions.
You, you'd have to tell them you know,
what website
to go to, what link to click on and etc.
So that's something that you should be
careful
about and you should, make sure you write
down
everything that you did.
Because it, it can determine whether
someone else can kind of
obtain the same data set to do the
analysis that you did.
Even something simple like moving data
around, moving files around on your
computer or maybe taking a large data file
and splitting it in half.
If you do these by hand, there's no record
of you ever doing it.
And, so someone wants to repeat what you
did, they have no instructions
for how to do it or where to move things
or what to do.
So, you should
think about this before you do them.
If you can, and, and ask yourself if it's,
if it's really necessary to do.
And if it is then you should document it
carefully.
it's, it's always very tempting especially
in the beginning of
analysis to think, well we're just
going to do this once.
So we don't really need to, kind of write
a computer program to do it or something
like that.
Or write it down very carefully.
For example you might only download the
data just once.
And so you don't need to kind of automate
that procedure.
But just be careful with any, if you find
yourself saying we're
going to do this just once, make sure you
still, everything is documented and,
and set to the point where someone else
who doesn't know you or
doesn't work with you could, could
potentially repeat what you're about to
do.
And so the general rule is that, why, the
reason you shouldn't do things
by hand is because anything that you do by
hand has to be precisely documented.
And this is a task, from my experience,
this is a task
that is much, much harder than it sounds.
Because things, little details that you
may not
think are important are actually very
important to
other people when they don't have the same
context and the same background that you
have.
Next rule is is related to the first and
involves not using the point and click
type software.
And so there's a lot of software that
has what are called graphical user
interfaces, or GUIs.
And graphical user interfaces are very
convenient,
they're very nice, they're very, often
very
intuitive and easy for most people to use,
they don't involve a lot of instruction.
And so it's nice to use a GUI and a lot of
software has these types of interfaces.
But the
problem is that a lot of the actions that
you take with
a GUI, like pointing and clicking are
difficult for others to reproduce.
So unless you specifically write down,
here, I clicked on this menu, and then I
clicked on this option it's difficult for
someone else to know exactly what you did.
So that's the danger of using things,
using graphical user interfaces
in any type, any type of data processing
or statistical analysis.
Some programs, if they have a GUI,
will produce the, a log file or a script
that includes the
kind of equivalent commands that to the
pointing and clicking that you did.
And so these log files and scripts can be
saved and can
be examined by another person in the
future if, if they have to.
So in general any data analysis software
or data processing
software that is highly interactive you
should be careful of.
Because interactive software
tends to be very nice to use and you can
kind of do a lot of
exploratory things with it, but this ease
of
use can come at the price of
reproducibility.
And so just be careful when you are using
interactive software that doesn't
oh, that doesn't log what you do or keep
track of the history.
now, of course, there may be other
software
packages that you use that are not
directly
related to the analysis of data or, or the
kind of, or the kind of data
analysis pipeline.
Which may have GUI's and that's fine.
For example, like your graph editor may
have a graphical user interface and that,
something that you use to write the code
or, or to write a report.
And that is usually, that is usually fine.
Because your analysis may not depend
critically
on exactly which text editor you use.
However, if on that rare case it does,
then you
need to be careful that everything is kind
of appropriately documented.